Load Balancer Exclusion EDGE-1708 (#998)
suse-edge/suse-edge.github.io: asciidoc/product/atip-lifecycle.adoc

This section covers the lifecycle management actions for clusters deployed via SUSE Telco Cloud.

=== Load Balancer Exclusion
There are many lifecycle actions that require worker nodes to be drained. During
the draining process all pods will be moved to other worker nodes in the
cluster. This leaves a node that is not hosting any services and therefore
should not have any traffic routed to it by external load balancers. In order to make
external load balancers aware of a worker node not being able to provide any
service a label can be applied to the node:
[,yaml]
----

> node.kubernetes.io/exclude-from-external-load-balancers: "true"

Reviewer: Can this better be a kubectl command like below?

----
In the case of upgrades of downstream clusters this can be automated by
annotating the RKE2ControlPlane on the management cluster with the annotation:
[,yaml]
----

> rke2.controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/load-balancer-exclusion="true"

Reviewer 2: Should we add this by default to the example in https://github.com/suse-edge/suse-edge.github.io/blob/main/asciidoc/product/atip-automated-provision.adoc - and perhaps link from the RKE2ControlPlane description bullets to this new section?

Author: That example is for a single node, so the annotation doesn't make any sense to me in that scenario. However, we could add language after the example for this. Something like: "If you define an RKE2ControlPlane for a downstream cluster with multiple nodes, please see this section about adding an annotation for load balancer exclusion" ... 
Thoughts?

Author: Ah, there is a multi-node example too. I will add to that

Author: Addressed with 7384e9f

> rke2.controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/load-balancer-exclusion="true"

Reviewer: Same comment, if we can perhaps use a kubectl command instead

----

This will immediately create an annotation:
[,yaml]
----
pre-drain.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/rke2-lb-exclusion: ""
----

> on all machines object on the management cluster for that RKE2ControlPlane. +

Reviewer 2: typo - on all machine objects

Author: Addressed with 7384e9f

With this annotation on the machine objects, any node on the downstream cluster
that is scheduled for draining will get the above node label attached prior to
the draining process starting. The label will be removed from the node once it
is available and ready again. 

> 

Reviewer: Can we also specify this is honoured if/when using MetalLB (here https://github.com/metallb/metallb/pull/2073) which is our default.

Author: I think it is addressed with 7384e9f as I am calling out MetalLB now. Let me know if you feel otherwise

> 

Author: Yes, makes sense. Will do

This section covers the lifecycle management actions for clusters deployed via SUSE Telco Cloud.

[#load-balancer-exclusion]
=== Load Balancer Exclusion
There are many lifecycle actions that require nodes to be drained. During the
draining process all pods will be moved to other nodes in the cluster. After the
draining process is finished the node is not hosting any services and therefore
should not have any traffic routed to it. Load balancers, such as MetalLB, can

> be made aware of this by applying a label to the node:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many lifecycle actions that require nodes to be drained. During the
draining process, all pods will be moved to other nodes in the cluster. After the
draining process is finished, the node does not host any services and therefore
should not have any traffic routed to it. Load balancers, such as MetalLB, can
be made aware of this by applying a label to the node:
```

[,yaml]
----
node.kubernetes.io/exclude-from-external-load-balancers: "true"
----

> For more details see: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#node-kubernetes-io-exclude-from-external-load-balancers[Kubernetes Documentation]

Author: Addressed with 64f27a2

To see the labels on all your nodes in a cluster you can run:
[,shell]
----
kubectl get nodes -o json | jq -r '.items[].metadata | .name, .labels'
----

In the case of upgrades of downstream clusters this can be automated by

> annotating the RKE2ControlPlane on the management cluster with the annotation:

Author: Addressed with 64f27a2

[,yaml]
----
rke2.controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/load-balancer-exclusion="true"
----

This will immediately create an annotation:
[,yaml]
----
pre-drain.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/rke2-lb-exclusion: ""
----

> on all machine object on the management cluster for that RKE2ControlPlane. +

Author: Addressed with 64f27a2

With this annotation on the machine objects, any node on the downstream cluster
that is scheduled for draining will get the above node label attached prior to
the draining process starting. The label will be removed from the node once it

> is available and ready again. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that is scheduled for draining will get the above node label attached prior to the start of the draining process. The label will be removed from the node once it is available and ready again. 
```

Author: Addressed with 64f27a2

        url: http://imagecache.local:8080/${NEW_IMAGE_GENERATED}.raw
----

Before applying the `capi-provisioning-example.yaml` file it is always good
practice to inform external load balancers about worker nodes being drained so
that they do not route traffic to nodes in this state. As mentioned in the
<<Load Balancer Exclusion>> you can automate this by annotating the
RKE2ControlPlane on the management cluster. In this examample an

> RKE2ControlPlane object called multinode-cluster is annotated:

Author: Addressed with 7384e9f

[,shell]
----

> k annotate  RKE2ControlPlane/multinode-cluster  rke2.controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/load-balancer-exclusion="true"

Author: Ah, good point

        url: http://imagecache.local:8080/${NEW_IMAGE_GENERATED}.raw
----

Before applying the `capi-provisioning-example.yaml` file it is always good
practice to inform external load balancers (e.g. MetalLB) about nodes being
drained so that they do not route traffic to nodes in this state. As mentioned
in the <<Load Balancer Exclusion>> you can automate this by annotating the
RKE2ControlPlane on the management cluster. In this example an RKE2ControlPlane

> object called multinode-cluster is annotated:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before applying the `capi-provisioning-example.yaml` file, it is always a good
practice to inform external load balancers (e.g. MetalLB) about nodes being
drained so that they do not route traffic to nodes in this state. As mentioned
in the <<Load Balancer Exclusion>> section, you can automate this by annotating the
RKE2ControlPlane on the management cluster. In this example, an RKE2ControlPlane
object called multinode-cluster is annotated:
```

[,shell]
----
kubectl annotate  RKE2ControlPlane/multinode-cluster  rke2.controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/load-balancer-exclusion="true"
----

> Verify that the machine objects have been annotated with: 

Author: Addressed with 64f27a2

[,yaml]
----
pre-drain.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/rke2-lb-exclusion: ""
----

> You can get the annotations for all your machine objects like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Fetch the annotations for all your machine objects:
```

Author: Addressed with 64f27a2
